Good morning.
I hope it's not too early for all the
Java developers in the audience today.
Looks like we've got a good group.
I just want to kick off this morning's
session with a little bit of information
for you on the rest of the week.
This is obviously our first session,
our overview session.
We've got a total of 10 sessions in one
feedback form just in the Java track.
That's the most content that we've
ever had for you guys in Java.
We've got a lot of exciting
stuff to share with you.
I don't want to steal any of
the thunder that we have in this
presentation and some of the other ones.
If you add that together
with the WebObject sessions,
I believe there's a total of 17 of those.
There's a whole lot of
Java-related content at this show.
With that in mind,
I want to go ahead and make my
introduction brief this morning
and bring up Steve Naroff.
and the senior director and
dynamic object dweeb for Apple,
and have him come up and tell you about
all this great stuff we've been doing.
Thank you, Steve.
Hi there.
I've never put such a
silly thing in my title,
but last year when I say I'm
director and I get off the stage and
I want to interact with you guys,
a lot of times people are taken aback.
He's a director.
There's this line between me and you,
so I figured it was really
important to let you guys know that
I still actually enjoy programming
and enjoy basically being very
active in the software community,
not just a people pusher, so to speak.
One of the things I wanted to open
with is I'm feeling great today.
Are you guys feeling great today?
Last night I felt really bad.
I was here until 10
o'clock getting ready,
and I was feeling very old.
And it was because it was
the first day of the show,
we're getting all this stuff together,
getting the demos ready for you guys,
putting the finishing
touches on the presentation.
And also Steve in his keynote
reminded me of my age,
unfortunately, when he said he had been
working with Avi for 15 years.
I actually started at
Next two months after Avi,
and then realized I had been working
with him for 15 years as well.
And I did some simple math, and I'm like,
holy cow, I've been doing this for
35% of my life on Earth.
I've spent with Steve and
Avi doing this stuff.
And as most of you know,
Steve's a pretty intense guy.
And one year with Steve.
And one year with Steve is not
really equivalent to one normal year,
right?
So it's not quite a
one to seven with dogs,
right?
But it's probably a one to three.
So I really hope my life isn't
going to end any time real soon,
because the math just doesn't add up.
But anyway, speaking of age,
Java is six years young.
And I think it's sobering to
realize it's just a child,
okay?
It's just a child.
And from its inception in 95,
where it hit the streets
about spring of 95,
to today, a tremendous amount of
change has occurred.
Okay, not only at Apple,
but in the Java community.
And so I'm going to spend the first half
of this talk giving the 10,000 foot view
of what's going on in the Java community.
I'm also going to talk about what's
changed in the Apple community.
I'm going to talk about
what our goals are.
Fortunately,
they haven't changed a hell of a lot in
the three and a half years I've been on
this stage representing the Java team.
What's our strategy?
Our strategy has changed a
little bit over the years,
but ever so slightly.
I go back and review the presentations
of prior years before putting a
presentation like this together,
and I was fairly happy
with the consistency.
I think that should also be good
for you guys because you don't
want to see us jerking you around,
so to speak.
That's not what we're here to do.
So from an Apple perspective,
and actually a Sun perspective,
we don't have any more excuses.
I think Java's in a pretty
interesting place right now,
not to say that we've solved all the
problems or it's in an ideal location,
but there's really nothing to
be embarrassed about anymore.
So for instance, when Java started in
the browser for applets,
it really wasn't an appropriate
API for developing industrial
strength applications.
At that time, it was called the Java 1.1,
and it had AWT,
which was insufficient for
developing great applications.
And Sun has fixed that.
Sun has Java 2, Sun has Swing,
Sun has JFC.
There are quite a few
interesting APIs on the platform.
There are quite a few interesting
APIs on the platform that do enable
you to do non-trivial things.
And other things that I guess have
changed is the development tools in
this space have gotten fairly robust.
And we're going to talk
about tools as well later on.
Let's see, what else do I want to
say about what's changed?
Well, we'll talk about it later
on over the course of time.
What's our goal?
Our goal is to be the number one
desktop for deploying Java applications.
Now, we've been working hard on this,
and we're going to tell you where we are
today and where we expect to be tomorrow.
That's part of what the talk is about.
And we want to be the number one desktop
for developing Java applications.
We have the coolest
hardware on the planet.
I see so many people with
Titaniums and running 10.
And we need to enable Java developers
to buy this great hardware and
software and do their Java development.
So why are we doing this?
Java is the fastest growing
language on the planet right now.
Just so you don't get mad at me,
this is not my data, it's Gartner,
that's why Objective-C isn't
on the chart for you
Objective-C people in the audience.
And also C# is at the bottom
there with a question mark.
C# is a language which is Java-like,
and Microsoft is currently promoting
it as the next generation language
for programming their platform.
Right now it's not really
on the radar screen,
so to speak,
because there are very few people
presently programming in it,
hence it doesn't have a line right here.
So it's unclear whether
it's going to overtake Java,
but certainly at this point in
time there's no evidence of that,
certainly from a
cross-platform perspective.
So, last year at Java 1, Sun, I guess,
had said that there were more
than 2 million Java programmers.
And that was really exciting,
given Java 1 had about 25,000
developers at the conference.
And hearing there were 2 million people
programming in Java was actually very
exciting and a good marketing slogan.
However, if you look closely,
a lot of these people are not qualified
to do the type of development that's,
I think,
being done by people in this room.
So, there are a lot of hobbyists.
In fact, most of the community
are hobbyists right now.
You know, this isn't a surprise, right?
If any of you have been in
small companies or even big
companies that are growing,
when you grow from what Java,
when you experience this
type of phenomenal growth,
it's pretty clear that all
2 million developers are not
going to be wildly qualified,
right?
So, this is just natural growing
pains of any successful platform.
So, this isn't meant to
disparage the community,
but to just educate you guys
that basically not all the
developers are created equal.
So, it's becoming mainstream.
This isn't any surprise.
There are slices of this pie,
which we're very interested in.
Certainly education, 19%. As you know,
Apple's very big in education.
Finance, personal finance in particular.
Last year, Schwab released an application
that was heavily advertised
on television called Velocity.
That application runs very
well on our platform and,
in fact, was developed on it.
And now there's all kinds of financial
applications that are following suit.
And later on,
we'll bring up someone from a company
that does a product called MoneyDance,
which is a very interesting financial
application written in Java.
So, it's becoming mainstream.
And what's cool is,
it's mainstream and it's good.
It's good technology,
especially the language.
The language is excellent and the
APIs are evolving to become excellent.
I'm very much into music,
and most of the popular
music of today really stinks.
I sort of expect that in our industry
because it's becoming a fashion industry,
whether you recognize it or not.
So it's sort of cool that Java is
technically sound and mainstream,
and both of those are very important.
So Java technology usage, there's...
A lot of energy going into the server.
As you can see,
that red point on the graph is for
servlets and Java server pages.
So right now,
the biggest application or the
largest amount of Java code is
being written on the server to do
Java server pages and servlets.
The second most common is still applets,
good old applets.
The difference between applets and
Java server pages is Java server pages,
says Gartner, is going to go up at a
faster rate than applets.
Applets tend to be pretty stagnant
if you look into the future.
The other point in the
graph is applications,
the blue line.
The blue line is steadily going up,
and we anticipate that to even go higher.
Mainly because all of these server
applications need to have a face,
and HTML and applets aren't going
to cut it for a lot of them,
so there are going to be lots of
applications which need to either
supplement the web-based interface
or replace the web-based interface.
The most growth that's expected,
even though it's a small
amount of energy right now,
is the enterprise Java beans.
Right now, enterprise Java beans is
the least popular in 2001,
but that's expected to grow
significantly as the data indicates.
So here's a diagram which I hope
will explain our strategy.
Excuse me for a minute.
We love the Java language, as I said.
There's three virtual
machines underneath.
The one that we're focusing on is
the HotSpot Java virtual machine.
There's a KVM and a CardVM.
So, on one end of the spectrum,
people are doing lots and lots
of work in the enterprise,
again, on the server.
As you know, most of you know,
WebObjects has been completely
retooled to be in Java,
and it's certainly one example of this.
Over time,
I expect the WebObjects team to
roll out their J2EE or Java 2
Enterprise Edition strategy.
Right now,
the reimplementation of WebObjects
in Java is a necessary first step.
However, to play on the server in the
application server space with Java,
you have to start adopting some
of the idioms and methodologies
that J2EE is implementing.
Mainly because BEA and Oracle and IBM,
all these companies,
their application servers are starting
to talk enterprise Java beans.
They're starting to
talk Java server pages.
And unless we talk that language,
we're not going to interoperate
with all that other work that's
going on in the community.
And hence,
we're not going to take advantage
of the full power of Java.
So, on the other end of the
spectrum is JavaCard and also
Java Ring and Java Lightbulb and,
you know, all that kind of stuff.
We're not interested in that.
There's companies investing
lots of time and energy in it,
and that's great.
And on that side of the space,
there's really no APIs per se
that sit atop the Java language.
On the other hand,
for these other class of devices,
cell phones, faxes, POMs,
all that good stuff,
there's the micro edition.
There is an API suite that, again,
is cross-platform as you define the
washing machine and the fax machine.
There's some lowest common
denominator API that they're
developing called the micro edition.
Okay?
This is what we're focusing on.
We're focusing on the Standard Edition.
The Standard Edition could be
considered the desktop edition.
The other way of thinking about it,
it's the core of Java.
Again, it's the core of Java.
For instance, the Enterprise Edition is a
superset of the Standard Edition.
So it includes all the
Standard Edition technology.
So one of the reasons we're focusing
on it is the better we make our core,
the better we make
Java 2 Standard Edition,
the better products like J2EE will run.
For example,
there are companies like Bluestone,
who I think is now owned by HP,
that have a pure
Java J2EE implementation.
I don't know if they formally
support it on Mac 10 yet,
but I ran into a couple of the
guys at one of the meetings,
and they said, "Yeah,
we brought it over to Mac 10
and it just ran." And so that
type of stuff blows me away.
It's like, "Wow, we have a full Java 2
Enterprise Edition stack,
and it just worked on Mac 10." Yeah.
And that type of stuff, again,
explains the value of what
we're trying to do here.
So Java 2 Standard Edition,
the Sun packages.
Just to be technically accurate,
this includes a little more
detail than the previous slide.
There are three packages which are really
built into the language definition.
They're the utilities or
the collection classes,
I.O., and LANG,
which includes things like
language reflection and so on.
Right above,
we have packages like security,
remote method invocation, mathematics,
networking.
Okay, and I'm not going to go
through all the packages.
I'm trying to highlight
the most important ones.
Above that, you start to have user
interface technologies.
Swing, AWT, Geom,
which is just a poor name for Java 2D,
and Applets and Sound.
So, without getting into any more detail
about what packages there are,
this is the pure Java 2 stack,
so to speak, that people are writing to.
And we want to support applications that
are being written on other platforms
so that they just work on our platform.
But that's not enough for us, okay?
We want to go beyond Java 2 SE.
We don't want to go beyond it because
we don't think Sun is doing their job
or that we think Java 2 SE is not good.
We're going beyond it because Apple has
some core competencies and some great
technology that we think need to
be available to Java programmers.
So, again, it's not a competitive thing.
It's not like by virtue of doing
some of this work that we are not
subscribed to the pure Java platform.
We are.
In fact,
all these technologies layer on with
standard Sun extensions like JNI.
So, right there we have Cocoa.
For Cocoa to interoperate with pure Java,
we have something we call
the Objective-C Java Bridge.
And that, again, uses JNI,
which is the lowest level software.
standard interface for
native method invocation.
So, in addition,
Cocoa implements a lot of the same
stuff at a GUI layer as Swing.
So sometimes people get confused.
Later on, I'm going to try and remove
some of that confusion.
I don't want to go through it right now.
Here's QuickTime.
So QuickTime is also layered on
some subset of the Java 2 SE stack.
And we have WebObjects,
which is layered atop the entire stack.
That is,
you don't need any native code to run it.
Whereas Cocoa and QuickTime both
contain native code.
Cocoa in the form of
Objective C and C code.
QuickTime mostly in C code.
So we also,
aside from offering the WebObjects,
Cocoa, QuickTime Advantage,
we want to take Swing and make
it integrate with our platform
in some fairly obvious ways.
One,
it needs to have the Aqua look and feel.
So we've done that.
Swing looks great.
And we think it looks better than any
other platform you can run Java on.
And I'll have some people up later
on to demonstrate some of that.
And the menu placement is
what Mac people expect.
It's at the top of the screen,
not associated with the window.
Quartz 2D integration,
basically we get all the PDF support
that Steve was talking about and very
fancy graphics by virtue of having
this stuff layered on top of Quartz.
And we also have out-of-the-box support.
Now, here's a quote from
Tony De La Lama at Worland.
Let me take a minute and really
emphasize the importance of this.
The Java 2 platform is,
at the end of the day,
an operating system.
And when you think of it in those terms,
the JRE,
which is just the runtime environment,
is about roughly 10 megabytes.
I think it's actually 8 and change,
but let's just say 10.
The problem with not bundling it
as part of the operating system is,
number one,
you have to have a fairly fast
connection to download this stuff.
Now,
that's only a small part of the problem.
The much bigger part of the
problem is if it's not bundled,
each application will bundle
its own because it doesn't
trust any other application to
install the right one for it.
Okay?
So, for instance,
you'll have... In the worst case,
you might... You might have five
Java applications on a Wintel system
that actually each application not
only has its own copy of some unique
version of the virtual machine,
but when it's running,
it has to instantiate that copy,
and each application will
instantiate its own copy.
Okay?
So the analogy is,
imagine if all the Carbon apps
that are being developed carried
around its own version of Carbon.
And when you ran it,
it had to instantiate its
own version of Carbon.
That's crazy.
Okay?
So it's really important to know this is
an architectural flaw that we... That is
basically not a flaw on our system,
but a flaw on every other system
right now that's running Java,
particularly Windows.
So, let's move on.
I'm going to get back to
something I said before,
which is, okay,
there's the Java 2 Standard Edition,
and we have Cocoa, but they have Swing,
and we have QuickTime, and they have JMF,
and there's some confusion about
what people should be programming to.
So, one way to remove the
confusion is to say,
and I can't say this because
I don't know all of you,
you need to put yourself in a box, okay?
And...
I know it's not easy sometimes,
but you need to think,
what are my goals and which box am I in?
So the one box that I'm
totally uninterested in for
purposes of this discussion,
unfortunately most of the software on
the planet probably lives in the box,
is the single platform and simple box.
So let's just get rid of that.
Don't care about it.
The next box is
multi-platform and simple.
So on one end of that spectrum,
you have something like a dumb terminal.
It has the maximum reach,
that is it runs on the most platforms,
but it's arguably the
worst user experience.
So HTML is in that same box, okay?
It has a great reach, okay?
And it's richer,
but it's still not as rich as you'd like.
So let's go to the blue box.
The other end of that spectrum
is a native application.
And I'm doing this native app
a little bit of a disservice
because it actually isn't a point.
Depending on how you've
architected your application,
it's a spectrum.
So let me describe what I mean by that.
With Java 2 SE,
you're writing cross-platform
code not only for your engine,
but for your GUI.
And that's a fully
cross-platform application.
What a lot of people do,
especially the shrink-wrap vendors
that care about quality in a big way,
what they do is they divide the
back end of their application and
their front end of the application.
So what they do is they port the back
end and make it as portable as possible,
but plug in a native GUI, so to speak.
So there are a lot of people right
now doing that on the Mac 10 platform.
They'll use Cocoa as the front end,
but they'll bring over a lot of
engine code from other platforms.
And that will give you the best possible
native application experience on Mac 10.
Again,
using technologies like Cocoa and Carbon.
So another point on that graph
is the browser plug-in that
usually contains some native code.
And I'm not going to
talk much about that.
You guys know what that is.
But Java is in that green box,
which is multiplatform and rich.
So the very first version of
Java had quite a bit of reach.
In fact, it was almost as close as HTML.
Well,
that's unfortunately changed because
Microsoft and Sun decided not to
see eye to eye on life with Java.
So the bottom line is
it isn't as ubiquitous.
Gets back to my previous
point on bundling.
So you can't depend on it in the
same way as you can depend on HTML.
The other point on the
graph is the Java 2 app.
This is where we see Mac OS X Java.
We think that it's going to
have much further reach than
the standard Java 2 app.
We also think that it's a much
richer experience because of
the integration we're doing,
which we're going to
demonstrate in this talk.
It's right below the native app.
We think we're pretty close,
but it certainly is not the
ideal way to get to all the
functionality of the Mac 10 platform.
Can you get to 90 plus percent of it?
Yes.
And we hope to close that gap over time.
So, let's move on.
Let's talk about precisely
what we're doing.
You've seen this stuff,
so I'm not going to...
You've seen it from everyone,
practically, I'm sure.
But for purposes of this discussion,
it's critical because Java was developed
on a Unix-based operating system.
This enables us to port more quickly,
enables us to innovate
rather than just port,
which is not always fun.
And it enables us to offer an environment
which is familiar to the Java community.
Okay, so there are many people in the
Java community who never considered us
before that are now coming over to 10.
And like it or not,
they open up a terminal and they can type
Java C or Java and they get all excited.
Wow, this is a Mac platform and I could
actually go into this terminal,
run Emacs, VI, and all these lowest
common denominator editors.
And use Java.
And that's great.
Okay, that's great.
Because who are we to tell them, no,
you have to live in this IDE or
you have to live in that IDE.
That's not appropriate.
So we have a spectrum of tools
starting from the command line
to some very great IDEs that
we're going to talk about later.
So just to put some of this
into concrete perspective,
I wanted to bring someone
up from the company that's
actually the first to deploy a
Java shrink wrap app on Mac OS X.
The fellow's name is Sean Reilly,
and he's
Chief Technical Officer from AppGen.
Thanks, Sean.
Hi.
As you said, my name is Sean Reilly.
I work with AppGen,
and I wrote MoneyDance.
MoneyDance started out its life
being developed under Linux FreeBSD.
That's kind of the world I come from.
I had a lot of time one summer
when my girlfriend went to London,
and I started writing MoneyDance,
you know, kind of evenings and
weekends kind of thing.
Continued that way for a couple of years,
and now I'm doing it full time.
And MoneyDance is developing
a lot faster because of that.
And I'm going to talk a
little bit about MoneyDance,
and then talk a little bit about how,
you know, my experience went with
bringing MoneyDance to OS X.
My current development
environment is OS X right now.
I switched completely from Linux FreeBSD,
so I'm now a part of the Mac world.
and enjoying it.
Moneydance is a personal
finance application,
a kind of program that helps you
manage your checking account,
credit cards, investments,
track a budget, things like that.
The newest version allows you
to do some online banking.
We've got a lot more online features,
you know, on the way,
and I'll show you that in a little bit.
You know,
the program is probably familiar
to anyone who's seen any type
of personal finance application.
It looks kind of like
a checkbook register.
Click through things
and enter transactions.
And has autofill.
Standard features you expect to
find that you don't generally see
in a lot of Java applications.
One thing about Java on
OS X I like is the look and feel.
This looks a lot, it looks very nice,
the buttons and the Aqua and
everything like that.
When you run it on Metal and
Linux and things like that,
it looks nice too,
but Java on OS X is just beautiful,
I think.
Didn't you put a picture
of it on your box?
Yeah, we have a box of money and answers.
It should be in stores now,
and the screenshots on the
box show the OS X version.
Even though the version in the
box you can put on any platform,
pretty much.
Thank you.
So, you know, I can step through the
program a little bit,
show you the investment management,
the different views.
And it's a, I think it's a very
full-featured application,
you know, not like a lot of the,
you know, you can go on the
Internet and probably find,
you know, 10,000, you know,
small Java applications
that do one or two things.
You know, MoneyDance is intended
to be very comprehensive,
include all the features you need,
and be a real, you know,
full-fledged desktop application.
Some of the features that we
have that you can really only
have in a Java application
are things like extensions.
We have an interface to add
something like plug-ins,
so you can add new features to the
program even after it's released.
So we can go through adding an extension.
And this works cross-platform.
It'll work on Windows, Mac OS 9,
Mac OS X, Linux, anything.
And we'll just choose an extension here.
I don't know how many of
you have heard of JPython,
but it's a Python scripting language
implementation written in Java.
And we've written a little extension
that will allow you to run Python scripts
in Java and get at your finances,
your transactions and accounts,
and do whatever you want to do with them.
So, you know,
make money that's more extensible.
This is just one extension that we have.
We've got a whole bunch
of them on the way.
You know, a lot of online services,
a lot of, you know,
some extensions that are
really only for hackers.
You know, if you want to just...
play around with it and,
you know,
and you can write your own extensions.
We have a public API that, you know,
you can add whatever type
of extension that you want.
And if your company wants to add, say,
an online service to Moneydance
that connects to your service,
you're free to write your own
extension and give it to us and,
you know,
we can provide it to Moneydance users.
So you can enter Python commands in here.
I won't really get into this much, but,
you know, just know that you can enter
Python commands in there and
it will access your data.
So how long did it take to port?
To port?
I don't know if I would
really call it porting.
We didn't have to
rewrite any code at all.
We didn't even have to recompile it.
We just took our JAR file.
When we distributed MoneyDance,
we distributed it with a JAR file
and several supporting JAR files,
like JCE, JSSE, things like that.
And we took the exact same JAR file
that we use on any other platform,
and we packaged it up
using the MRJ app builder.
And it took us under an hour to
figure out how to do all of this stuff
and to have a clickable icon that
you could run the application with.
And that was starting from never
seeing Mac OS X before to having
an application that looks like it's
written in Cocoa running on that.
Well, thanks a lot, Sean.
Thank you.
So, one note,
that's running on stock Mac OS X.
Okay, so he wasn't running on any
custom version that we have.
And we will be showing
you some custom versions,
so I want to make sure
I distinguish between that.
So, Mac X is appropriate for development,
deployment of these Java applications.
And I'm amazed at the performance of that
app and just the overall fit and finish,
given, again, where we were a couple
years ago with Java.
So, very exciting.
Here's our roadmap for 2001.
As you all know, we shipped, again,
the Mac 10 GM on March 24th.
Available at the show, I believe,
there's a pre-release 2 of IE.
One of the things we didn't ship for the
GM release of Mac 10 is applet support.
So that was a collaboration
between us and the browser vendors.
The most notable ones are the OmniWeb
group and the Microsoft folks who do IE.
So IE's doing a pre-release.
We're a little bit behind
on the OmniWeb work,
but we expect to do that as well.
We're going to have a release
by the end of this week.
We wanted to have it available for
you this week so that you could start
playing with this stuff in the browser.
and we expect to have a full-fledged
GM update of 1.3.1 in July.
For those who aren't aware,
last week Sun actually blessed 131 GM,
and that means we're only going to
have a two-month delta between Sun's
latest stuff and our latest stuff.
Okay,
this is the best that we've ever done,
and in fact,
I think the best in the industry
at tracking Sun's latest release.
Again, years ago,
we were always apologetic.
This year, no excuses.
We have this stuff in a timely fashion.
Two claps.
Okay, so what's new in DP1?
As I said, applet embedding now works.
We've made many improvements to
the Aqua swing look and feel,
debugging and profiling work,
and many bug fixes.
So even though you can deploy,
obviously we still have
bugs and we still fix them.
So what's left?
We are going to be updating to 1.3.1,
and that contains some new APIs,
a new version of HotSpot.
and we have to make sure we're
conformant to Sun's JCK validation suite.
Right now I think we're passing,
the release you'll get,
I think we're passing 90 plus percent,
so we don't have far to go there
and certainly fix more bugs.
So, now I'm going to shift gears.
You know we're shipping with 10.
You know what our plans
are for the update.
Fairly straightforward stuff.
Well, what are other things
that are on the horizon?
Okay?
Because I think we only meet once a year,
and it's important for
me to talk about this,
because I know many of
you are interested in it,
even though some of these things
I'm going to be talking about,
we don't have product plans
for to talk about today.
But it's direction.
So, Java Secure Sockets,
this is some really good news.
You can go get this today.
It's a pure Java implementation
of SSL and TSL for doing
HTTPS or just Secure Sockets.
It's available from Sun's website,
and there's the URL for it,
and you can bundle it
with your application.
So, this is a perfect example of
Sun continuing to add value to the
platform and us being able to take
advantage of it without doing any work.
Okay?
So, that's the ideal world
from my perspective.
And the other thing to
note is on Mac OS 9,
the only place we had Secure Sockets
was within the browser because
of how we chose to implement it.
We didn't have this
feature for applications.
And now with our
emphasis on applications,
it's critical that this feature exists.
So, again,
this is richer than the capabilities
we were providing on 9 with MRJ.
Java Web Start.
This is a very interesting
technology that enables you to just
click on an icon within a browser
and get your application to run.
There's no ad hoc stuff you have to do,
which varies from product to product,
and it gives you transparent update.
It also is available from anywhere.
It's a shame this didn't
exist three or four years ago,
but it exists now and
we're right on top of it.
We think it's great and
it is also integrated.
To demonstrate some of this is
Steve Lewallen from my team.
Thanks, Steve.
Good morning, everybody.
So I have two actual cool web-based
demos for you this morning.
One is Java Web Start,
and actually I'm also going
to show applets running in
Internet Explorer as well.
So Java Web Start, what is it?
Where did it come from?
What's the deal about Java Web Start?
Well, Java Web Start was developed
through the Java community process,
and for those of you who don't
know anything about that,
that's basically a forum that
Sun established to work with their
partners on developing critical
technologies like Web Start for Java.
So Web Start.
Web Start is all about
permitting Java applications,
be they small or large,
simple or complex,
to be deployed from any vendor's web
server to any Java-enabled web server.
Java Web Start is a platform that
allows Java Web Start to deploy
on any Java Web Start desktop,
such as Mac OS X,
from any vendor's web browser,
meaning a web browser doesn't have to,
for example,
have the capability to display
an applet to still use Web Start.
All of that is to be done
securely through a single
click of the user's mouse.
We have a simple HTML page
above us on the screens.
This is vanilla HTML,
just some images and some links.
The WWDC WebStart image here has a
hotlink behind it that is tied to a JNLP,
a Java Network Launching
Protocol WebStart document,
which is written in standard XML.
This document contains everything
WebStart needs to know in order
to find the application it
needs to present to the user.
So I'm going to start the demo off.
I'm going to click on
my little image here.
And this click will trigger the
download of the XML document.
And that in turn will trigger
the WebStart technology,
which we saw happen very rapidly.
But it triggered the WebStart.
So we used the WebStart technology
to examine that JNLP file.
It found out what application
needed to be downloaded,
what version it was, what's its name,
who wrote it, where to find out more
information about it,
all that kind of good stuff.
It, in our case,
downloaded the application because
it wasn't already on our system.
Had it been,
and had the user requested the same
version as was on our system already,
it wouldn't have downloaded it.
It would have just reused what was there,
and the download would have been faster.
launches the application.
So once you get a bunch of these
applications on your system,
you may have difficulty managing them.
Well, Web Start has built-in
application management in it.
So I'm going to go and I'm going to
start the Web Start Management Console.
Bring up my dock.
[Transcript missing]
I mean, that is like,
it can do it faster than I can type it.
So that is a premier example of
how tightly you can integrate
Cocoa services with current Java.
So we can also ask the framework,
what are the suggested corrections?
I don't really know how to
spell the word "this" maybe,
so I'll go and I'll
Control-Click over the word.
and I'll get a list of possible
corrections and this is my correction.
I'll do the same thing
for the second word.
The second word I want to
point out that we can also tell
the system just ignore this,
you know, it's a funky word, you know,
remove that red underscore.
I don't want to see it.
Or we could say this is a new word.
A lot of times in our business we know
that the spell checkers complain about
all kinds of technical terms that we
know are really spelled correctly.
So I can actually ask the system to
learn it and then all applications,
native and otherwise,
that use the Cocoa spelling service on
OS X will now realize that that word is
a correct spelled word and not spell it,
you know, indicate that it's been
spelled incorrectly.
So in this case I'll just choose
something and it's corrected.
So there we have it.
We've taken a standard
Java swing application.
We aquified it.
We turned on the Aqua look and feel.
And we added a few new
Apple Java frameworks released this
week that you can use for free.
And we wrapped it up in Web Start.
We deployed it through
an Apache web server.
Down to our Mac OS X desktop
through Internet Explorer all
with a single click of the mouse.
So that's the Web Start demo.
So let's see how applets are doing today.
As you know,
in the first version of Mac OS X,
applets weren't running so great.
We've made a lot of progress
with working with Microsoft,
and the Java team has worked really
hard on getting this to work.
So here is pretty much the
biggest swing applet I could find.
It's a demo application that Sun wrote
quite a while ago to demonstrate all the
capabilities of the swing UI toolkit.
And we've probably all seen this before.
I'm just going to play with it a little,
and we can see the performance
and see that it's okay.
Now, the very first demo tab that
comes up is really my favorite,
internal frames.
The developer that did this
really went to extremes to make
it very OS X look and feel.
So we see our windows here.
We can move them around.
That's pretty fast.
And we can resize them.
That's happening fast.
And let me make this
small so I can scroll.
And that happens fast.
What's really cool is, of course,
Mac OS X has a dock on it, right?
A transparent dock.
So if I start minimizing these windows,
we see a transparent little
dock appearing at the bottom.
And it's even,
you see the transparency as
I move the window around.
So that's really cool.
They did a great job.
So let's take a look at some other
pieces of this swing set demo.
This is a good one.
We can see how fast the
columns move around.
And I can resize them and
do that kind of cool stuff.
And we can see,
we'll look at the progress bar.
And it's hauling the mail.
It's working very fast.
So that is swing set two demo running as
an applet inside of Internet Explorer.
And those are my demos.
So thanks, Steve.
Great.
Thanks, Steve.
No problem.
Pretty cool.
Next, I'd like to bring up Larry Abrahams
from Sun Microsystems.
Larry has been one of our
strongest supporters and son,
and I just wanted to bring him up
to thank him for all the work that
his team has done on our behalf
and all the help they give us.
So I also wanted him to take
the time to say a few words.
Thanks, Larry.
Thank you.
First thing I want to do is
thank Steve and his team for
the great job they did on 1.3.
It was sort of a long time coming
in getting Java 2 on the Mac,
but it was worth the wait.
As you can see here,
it's just fantastic implementation.
So thanks, Steve,
to you and your team for
doing such a great job.
And one of the comments
Steve made about 1.3.1,
about Apple shipping 1.3.1,
I guess within two
months of when Sun ships,
well, just to put that in perspective,
Apple will probably be,
I can't say for sure,
but Apple will probably be the
first platform port of 1.3.1.
So we've come from a
situation where Apple,
in many cases,
lagged behind Sun much further than
either party would have liked to
today when Apple is... . ...the first
licensee to be shipping on 1.3.1.
So congratulations and thanks for that.
Yeah.
And I expect the same on 1.4 as well.
I expect Apple will be close behind us.
Did you give a date for that yet, Steve?
Well, did you?
Yeah.
End of November.
And we're right on schedule.
In fact, next week we'll be
shipping the beta for 1.4.
So let me talk a little about
the state of the partnership,
and let me make a little confession.
Before I joined Sun, I joined Sun in '98,
I was an Apple employee.
I worked at Claris, actually, which,
at least in those days,
was Apple's software arm, in a sense.
And as most of you know,
Claris has now sort of
migrated into FileMaker Inc.
Well, when I was there,
I was responsible for
Claris's internet products,
homepage and email and some other things.
Still some good emailer fans out there?
Glad to hear that.
It's a great product.
And when I came to Sun,
my boss at the time,
who was heading up all
of Sun's Java efforts,
told me, "I have three missions for you.
Number one,
get Java 2 shipped." Because at the time,
Sun was having problems getting
1.2.0 Java 2 out the door.
It was a big deal,
and there were some problems
with the schedule and with
getting the thing product ready.
The second mission was
to get HotSpot shipped.
It was sort of in a similar state.
HotSpot was a really cool next
generation VM technology that
we were having some trouble,
at the time, productizing.
And the third thing was, can you please,
given that you're coming from Apple,
could you please try and fix the
Apple and Sun relationship and
get Apple to a point where we're
shipping compatible products
in a reasonable timeframe?
So very early on,
and those were--that's true.
Those were my first missions.
Those were my three commands
from my boss at the time.
So very early on,
Steve and I got together
and talked about,
well, you know,
what could we do to make things better?
And I just want to, once again,
thank Steve for,
from those early conversations,
the spirit of partnership that the two
teams have shown and the really getting
better with every month collaboration.
We've gone from almost two, you know,
two camps that were barely working on
the same agenda to now intimately working
on technologies that we're sharing for,
you know,
fundamental Java technologies that the
two teams developed collaboratively.
I'll give you two examples of that.
The Aqua look and feel for
Swing that looks so beautiful.
I won't in any way put down
our metal look and feel or
our windows look and feel,
but I got to say,
this one looks pretty hot.
It was actually the result of a
really tight collaboration between
Sun engineers working at Apple,
and Apple engineers working at Apple,
and that's something that, you know,
Sun has committed real resource to
invest in and will continue to invest in.
The second example I'll
mention is on the VM.
Our two VM teams ever since Hotspot
have worked extremely closely together,
and our VM team is extremely
excited about working with
Apple on Apple's port of Hotspot.
And as a matter of fact,
there's some really exciting work that
Steve may talk about for the future where
Apple has developed some great extensions
to Hotspot that Sun is working on.
And Sun is going to be
looking at productizing.
So at this point,
the collaboration is so strong that the
technology is flowing in both directions,
and that's just a great comment
on the state of the partnership.
So let me talk a little about the
future of client Java as Sun sees it,
and I think it lines up very well with
what you've seen and heard here today.
Sun's latest statement and vision
for client Java is something we
call Rich Clients for Web Services.
If you come to Java 1,
you'll hear a lot more about that.
But there's a lot of
talk about web services.
So what are web services?
Web services are essentially
internet or web or network services,
in our case, implemented on top of either
J2SE and things like servlets,
Java server pages in some cases,
and Java 2 Enterprise Edition and
things like EJBs.
And these web services today are
being made accessible through
standard XML protocols like SOAP,
which is something that Sun is,
at this point,
standing behind from a strategic
web service perspective.
So what good are these web services,
though?
I think Steve brought this up,
without a great face on them.
So as we all know, the most popular,
lowest common denominator face is
HTML and technologies that create HTML.
But it's always been my vision
in particular that the need for
interfaces that go beyond the browser,
for a lot of reasons,
is something that is
going to really come back,
in a sense.
We sort of took a detour in
many ways with the birth of the
web through HTML and through,
in a sense, a lesser user experience
for online and network data.
And I think the time is rapidly
approaching where we're going to
see a lot more innovation in user
interfaces that go beyond the browser.
And I think Java is going
to play a key role in that.
And the types of things you're
seeing with Java 2 are going
to play a key role in that.
So our vision is that Java 2,
and certainly Apple's version of Java 2,
will be a great user experience
for this emerging generation of
rich clients for web services.
And I think it's only natural that Apple,
in a sense,
be the leading provider of those,
or the vanguard of those,
since Apple invented the rich client,
the rich interface.
And Sun would like nothing more than to
see Apple be at the forefront of that.
And be in the lead in terms of showing
off this new generation of technology.
So thank you once again.
Sounds good to me.
And I look forward to-- Thanks a lot.
Our next year.
So for those of you that
didn't attend Java 1 last year,
actually Steve Jobs was on stage.
He was featured along with Scott McNeely.
And it was one of the first appearances
Steve has made where he wasn't the star.
And it was pretty interesting to
get him up on stage with Scott and
actually shake hands and make sure the
two companies are working together.
So not only are the people
in the trenches working well,
we have our executives that are
actually kissing and hugging as well,
which is great.
[Transcript missing]
So that's sharing.
By the way, I'm running low on time,
so I'm going to really have to zoom,
unfortunately.
I usually go too fast.
Now I'm going too slow.
So an industry first.
In the Steve Jobs tradition,
very dramatic.
Hardware accelerated swing is what
I'd like to talk about right now.
In the product that we're going
to be giving you later this week,
it is not the default, okay?
However, this support is in there,
and if you go to some other talks
that are part of the Java track,
the guys will hopefully
tell you how to enable it,
again, if you're nice to them.
So, Accelerated Swing Caffeine Marks.
Caffeine Mark is a micro-benchmark,
which we don't particularly like,
but everyone else seems to
want to measure Java by it.
So, let's talk about the imaging score.
In the past, when we focused on the
just-in-time compiler,
we have had advancements
over the years in some of the
low-level compiler jitsy space.
We always looked fairly mediocre,
if not poor, on imaging and graphics.
But now,
with the hardware-accelerated swing,
basically,
we're 8.5 times faster for graphics,
okay?
I'm sorry, that was imaging.
Now it's graphics.
The graphics score is
even more impressive.
We go from a mark of, what is that,
200 to, whoa,
23 times faster for Caffeine Marks.
So again,
we don't really like Caffeine Marks,
but we're showing them
because now we do well.
A more interesting benchmark is
actually an internal benchmark that
Sun has developed to measure swing.
So because a lot of the focus
of the GUI is now centered
around swing and not AWT,
measuring how fast swing performance
can be is very important.
So for swing, our swing mark on a 500
MHz G4 with a Radeon is 65.
That's the mark.
When we hardware accelerate,
we're 55% faster.
In this benchmark, unlike the other one,
lower is better.
An interesting test that the engineers
who were working on this decided to do,
they said,
what if graphics were infinitely fast?
So what they did was they stubbed out,
so to speak, from Java the calls to the
lower level graphics where they
didn't do any drawing at all,
and the swing mark was only, what,
five points off from where we were when
we were doing hardware acceleration.
I mean, this is incredible.
So the pendulum swings, right?
Oh, the Jitsi's the problem.
The garbage collector's the problem.
No, we got that right.
Now the graphics are the problem.
Looks like graphics are going to go away.
Well, the pendulum will swing back,
and we'll be back to the compiler.
So it's an iterative process.
The important point is
performance is critical,
and we're working on it.
I'd like to close with development tools.
Core Apple Tools,
we're investing in tools.
Steve told you that.
You know that.
You have a disk in the bag.
Actually, I'm thrilled to say you
have three disks in the bag.
You have Apple's tools,
which I'm responsible for.
You have JBuilder,
which is a fabulous pure
Java development environment.
And you have CodeWarrior Early Access.
So, I think at a high level,
it seems like Mac 10 is
just out of the gate,
but you guys have more tools than
you've ever had in previous years.
Again, Steve is very aggressive about
wanting you to be on the platform.
Without the tools,
you wouldn't be as successful.
So I think you have all
the tools to be successful.
Here's a slide on Apple's tools.
WebObjects you're familiar with.
I'm not going to go through this in
detail because I have eight minutes left.
But there are talks on all these.
I think the important
point is just what I said.
You have the tools to be successful.
We have the application server.
So again, you could do your rich,
swing-based Java app,
or you could do the browser UI.
This is a rich GUI, rich web GUI.
Again, Apple uses this stuff so you
can be assured that we're
eating our own dog food,
and if we have problems,
we're going to fix them.
And it's critical that we
find them before you do,
typically.
So CodeWarrior has Java 2 support,
full RAD support,
debugging is much improved for
both application and applets.
And Java deployment,
you folks are mostly familiar with,
hopefully, Zero-G.
They have been a great partner
for the last three years.
They're very easy to work with,
give us lots of feedback on the runtime,
and I think they have
some great products,
and I hope you agree with that.
Java performance analysis,
one of the reasons we're getting
faster is because we actually have
tools to analyze performance now.
And this tool is fabulous.
It's best of breed.
That's another point I need to make.
The dust has settled
in the Java tool space,
okay?
If we were to choose a tool
three years ago... We would have
probably picked the wrong one,
okay?
So right now, the dust has settled.
We are choosing to work specially with
the products that I'm referencing here.
I'm not just putting them on a
slide because the product exists.
There are many products that exist.
For instance,
Forte is Sun's development environment,
okay?
I hope that's very
successful on our platform.
There are other
Java development environments.
The people who are being
called out here are people that
Apple has chosen to partner with
and give special love and care,
okay?
Okay?
So these tools, we think,
are the best of breed, basically.
So last, I have six minutes left.
I'm going to bring up
Blake Stone of Borland,
someone who supported us for
the last two or three years.
Thank you.
Thank you, Steve.
We're really excited about this.
This is something that we've been
working hard for the past year.
You saw early technology
demos last year of JBolder 4,
but announced last week
is our JBolder 5 product,
and shipping in all of your bags,
you have a preview release of JBolder 5.
So I hope you have a chance to
look at that after the show's over,
or even during the show.
I wanted to talk a little bit about
this and some of the path to get here,
but we have only a few minutes here.
So I'm going to sort of
tailor this discussion,
I guess, and showcase the product.
You'll get just a little bit of a
glimpse of what JBolder 5 is about here.
You can see an awful lot more
in a couple of other sessions.
Wednesday at 10:30,
there's a session showcasing a
couple of Java-related tools.
We'll be there.
But there's also a session Wednesday.
So Wednesday at 5:00,
I'd encourage you to come to where
we'll showcase JBolder in a lot more
depth and see a lot of what we're
going to gloss over very quickly here.
Still,
I would like to bring up and showcase
a few things just for those of you
who may not be familiar with JBuilder.
Of course,
we brought it to the Macintosh.
we got a nice Aqua icon for it.
It was critical to us to really look
like we belong in this environment.
In fact,
we've done quite a bit of tailoring.
And we can't necessarily see all
of the details we went through,
but everything from the default
order of buttons to making sure that
Aqua looked right in the environment.
These are things we really focused on.
So here it is in all its glory,
and we'll demo it in
Aqua this time around,
because Aqua works great.
It looks fantastic.
It's the right way to work on
products on the Macintosh platform.
So I have a simple application,
our Welcome app,
the default that comes up here.
And I want to extend that a
little bit by taking advantage
of a few pieces of the product.
First of all, I'm going to go into
our graphical designer,
which allows us to do visual
manipulation of Java beans.
And so we're going through and looking
at this particular application and
discovering that what we have here,
essentially, is an empty frame.
This empty frame we want to
use instead of border layout.
Perhaps we want to use an X, Y layout,
allow me to position some things,
drop a button in place,
drop a text field in place.
And we get to see our app
being designed in Aqua here.
That's an option we could choose
if we were designing something for
another platform to preview that,
but why?
So we'll get a scrolling
region and perhaps just drop
a list in this region as well.
I can even work with
non-visual components.
You can see on this side here,
I'm getting a collection of
components that I'm manipulating.
And all of them so far
are visual components,
but I could also go in and say, you know,
I'd like to select a
non-visual component.
In this case, I'd like to go find a
model for this list.
And I could just scroll down
and find my default list model.
and drop one of those as well.
So now I have a non-visual component that
I can interact with by telling it that
I'd like my list to use this model that
I've created and then write some code.
So the visual designer lets me very
quickly assemble the user interface.
It doesn't use any
proprietary techniques.
What it's doing is it's writing Java code
for me the way I would write it,
using setters and getters.
But it then allows me also to
drop in and write my custom code.
And I might want to write
some code here that interacts
with this default list model.
And if I can't remember the name of it,
I can ask for some assistance with that.
And perhaps I can add an element.
And the element I will get from a--see,
we have a text field on here, jTextField.
I'll just go ahead and get the
text from it and compile that.
One of the things that's really
critical to us is fast compile time.
We've got an integrated compiler
that does incremental compiles
through a smart dependency checker
so that even on large projects,
and I mean enormous projects,
JBuilder itself consists of more classes
than the entire JDK and we can do an
incremental compile in under 10 seconds.
So speed, again, is critical to us.
We can go from right from there to
being able to actually run this code.
And we'll take a shortcut here and jump
right into even debugging this code.
So it'll do a quick dependency
check to make sure that we're
actually running this code.
We'll make sure that
nothing's been changed.
We'll get the debugger UI up and we'll
launch our Java swing application here.
Where I can type some text in,
click the button to add it,
and we hit a break point.
So we have a pure Java debugger here that
has a really rich set of capabilities.
Now we're not going to be
able to look at them all here.
I again encourage you to
come to another session.
But if I want to find things
out about this text field,
I've got access to a really rich
UI that allows me to browse that
object and all of its characteristics,
the class it belongs to, and so forth.
So that's pretty exciting in its own way,
because we've got a real best-of-breed
development environment here,
running on Mac OS X,
letting me do all of my work
on my favorite platform.
By the way,
that's not just marketing speak.
Long-time Apple fan,
you may be able to tell
that I wear the colors here.
I've been a believer for a long time,
and this is like coming home for me.
But there are a lot of other interesting
things that showcase the power of the
environment that we're working on.
We're working on an environment
that has a ton of very sophisticated
integration with the native environment.
JBuilder is probably the worst torture
test you could throw at a Java VM,
because not only are we a fast editor,
a graphical environment, a debugger,
which is one of the nastier
areas in porting the Java VM,
but also we just include a
whole bunch of functionality.
So one of the things I wanted
to showcase is if we go and
look at our release notes,
we'll bring them up in our
integrated HTML viewer.
Well,
if you're not really too fond of the
HTML viewer you're using currently,
you may want to note that this particular
viewer you can just type a URL into,
and from within JBuilder,
browse directly to the web.
And the performance is...
and get completely
reasonable performance.
Now for sort of the surprise.
All of this is running
without hardware acceleration.
Okay, so the hardware acceleration
makes things enormously faster.
Let's showcase perhaps one of the
worst case examples of what happens
without the hardware acceleration.
If I grab and move this split,
you can see that the performance is
perhaps not what we would hope for.
Let's see what that's like
with hardware acceleration on.
So I'm going to come down and go
find my collection of JBuilder icons.
And I'm sorry, I absolutely have to.
We spent enough time on
the artwork for these.
We really wanted to get that
photorealistic icon thing down pat here.
And go in and have a look.
I've got a couple of configuration files
that if you go ahead and register your
version of JBuilder that's in your bag,
you'll find that we provide you tips.
So once you can get the
new Java VM from Apple,
and please get the new
Java VM from Apple,
JBuilder really benefits from
a lot of the work these guys
have been putting into it.
We'll show you how to make these kinds
of changes to turn on things like
the hardware graphics acceleration
in the license email you get.
So we'll bring JBuilder back up and
have a look at the kind of difference it
makes and sort of that one key indicator,
which is dragging that splitter.
So if you remember before,
we were getting sort of
a frame or two a second.
And now, with hardware acceleration,
it's Smooth.
Why don't you go to the web page?
Go to the web page?
Can you go to the web page?
Oh, yeah, we can actually, sure.
I mean, that's just a text view.
Let's bring up something with graphics.
So, do you have a favorite page in mind?
No.
The one you just brought up.
Go back to the Mac OS X page
from Apple's site here.
So look at that.
The scrolling performance, you'll find,
is remarkable.
We're really pleased with what
hardware acceleration can do.
And I would like to take this
opportunity to thank many of you in
the audience who worked on this and
have been working on it very hard.
The Java team at Apple has been
doing a phenomenal job and we've been
really proud to be working with them.
Thank you, Steve.
Thank you.
Pretty much out of time.
I think I've said a lot today,
which is why I'm out of time,
along with my great demoers and speakers.
I just want to touch on
the important points.
The important points are what we
ship with Mac 10 we're very proud of.
We're actively working
to make it a lot better,
and we've talked about some of that.
We think we're going to have the best
platform on the planet for running Java,
and you've seen applications
today that all work very well.
We hope to bring the
hardware acceleration to you
guys in a timely fashion.
I guess that's all I have.
I have a bunch of tracks here.
There's the Java Virtual Machine track,
or session I should say,
Wrapping Mac OS APIs in Java Beans,
Java Development Tools, Java Performance,
JBuilder,
and there's another five sessions.
Since we didn't have time today to
take Q&A given the length of the talk,
feel free to come to the Java Feedback
Forum on Friday and we'll hope
to answer any questions you have.
Thanks for coming.
Take care.